---
sidebar_label: 5.1 Model-Level Policies
slug: model-level
---

# Model-Level Policies

The most frequently used access policies are those declared at the model level - written using `@@allow` and `@@deny` model-level attributes.

:::info Model-level vs field-level attributes

ZenStack follows Prisma's convention: model-level attributes are prefixed with `@@` and field-level attributes are prefixed with `@`.

:::

Here's a basic example:

```zmodel
model Post {
    id Int @id
    title String
    published Boolean @default(false)

    // published posts are readable
    @@allow('read', published)
}
```

You can also achieve the same goal with `@@deny`:

```zmodel
model Post {
    id Int @id
    title String
    published Boolean @default(false)

    @@allow('read', true)
    @@deny('read', !published)
}
```

Both `@@allow` and `@@deny` takes two arguments: 

1. Operation
   
   `create`, `read`, `update`, `delete`, or a comma-separated list of them. You can also use `all` to abbreviate all operations.

2. Condition: a boolean expression

    You can use boolean literals: `true` and `false`. Operators `==`, `!=`, `>`, `>=`, `<`, and `<=` can be used to compare values. You can also use `&&`, `||`, and `!` to compose boolean expressions.

    There're functions and special expressions that help you write more advanced conditions. We'll cover them in later chapters.

### Evaluation of Model-Level Policies

You can write as many policy rules as you want for a model. The order of the rules doesn't matter.

ZenStack determines whether a CRUD operation is allowed using the following logic:

1. If any `@@deny` rule evaluates to true, it's denied.
1. If any `@@allow` rule evaluates to true, it's allowed.
1. Otherwise, it's denied (secure by default).

Each of the CRUD operation type governs a set of Prisma Client methods, as follows:

- **create**
  
    `create`, `createMany`, `upsert`, and `create`/`createMany`/`connectOrCreate` nested in create/update calls.

- **read**
  
    `findUnique`, `findUniqueOrThrow`, `findFirst`, `findFirstOrThrow`, `count`, `aggregate`, and `groupBy`.
    
    The "read" operation also determines whether the value returned from `create`, `update` and `delete` method can be read.

- **update**

    `update`, `updateMany`, `upsert`, and `update`/`updateMany`/`set`/`connect`/`connectOrCreate`/`disconnect` nested in create/update calls.

- **delete**

    `delete`, `deleteMany`, and `delete` nested in update calls.

:::info Relation manipulation and policies

When a Prisma call involves relation manipulation, it can be unobvious which side the relation needs to satisfy the "update" policies. For example, given the following model:

```zmodel
model User {
    ...
    posts Post[]
}

model Post {
    ...
    author User @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id])
    authorId Int
}
```

If we add a post to a user like:

```ts

db.user.update({
    where: { id: 1 },
    data: {
        posts: { connect: { id: 1 } }
    }
})
```

Does `Post#1` need to satisfy its "update" policies?

The trick is to think about which side of the relation will have a foreign key update. In example, the foreign key `authorId` of `Post#1` will be updated, so `Post#1` needs to satisfy its "update" policies.

:::

### How Do Policies Affect Prisma Client's Behavior?

The enforcement of access policies causes an enhanced Prisma Client to behave differently from the original one. 

You can predict what happens with the following principles:

- Read methods behave as if the rows not satisfying the policies don't exist

    For example, `findMany` only returns rows that satisfy the policies. `count` only counts rows that satisfy the policies. This applies to nested read as well. ZenStack enforces "read" policies by injecting `where` clauses into the Prisma query.

:::warning Nested read can filter out parent records

There's one thing that may catch you off guard. When you do a find and include a to-one relation field, if the field is not nullable and cannot be ready by the current user, it'll result in the parent record being filtered out. For example:

```ts
// if `author` is not readable, the parent `Post` is excluded
const posts = await db.post.findMany({ include: { author: true }});
```

The reason for this design choice are two-fold:

1. Type safety

    If we silently drop the `author` field, we'll break type-safety, because the `author` field is not optional in its TS definition.

2. Performance

    Prisma doesn't provide a direct way to conditionally include a non-nullable to-one relation. If we choose to drop the field, we'll have to do post-read processing which may require additional database queries.

:::

- Bulk update and bulk delete methods behave as if the rows that don't satisfy the policies don't exist

    For example, `updateMany` only updates rows that satisfy the policies. Same for `deleteMany`. ZenStack enforces "update" and "delete" policies by injecting `where` clauses into the Prisma query.

- Other write methods throw errors if the corresponding policies are not satisfied

    For example, `create` throws an error if the policies are not satisfied. When possible, ZenStack determines policy satisfaction by inspecting the input object of the Prisma query. Otherwise, it wraps the write into a transaction and checks the policies after the write is complete, but before the transaction is committed.

    If a nested write causes a policy violation, the top-level write will be rejected as a whole.

:::info A write can imply a read

Here's another fun fact with access policies. A `create`, `update` or `delete` call may succeed but still throws an error. Why?

The reason is that a write can imply a read. When you call `db.user.create`, the created result will be returned, and it'll be subject to the "read" policy check. If it fails, an error will be thrown even though the write is persisted.

:::

### Next

Using only the direct fields of a model for access control isn't super useful. In the next chapters, you'll learn how to the requesting user's information and relation fields to write more advanced rules.
