---
sidebar_label: 5.2 Authentication and Authorization
slug: authn-authz
---

# Authentication and Authorization

Authentication and Authorization are two most important concepts for designing a secure application. To set up a solid knowledge foundation, let's first clarify what they mean respectively in the context of ZenStack.

### Authentication

Authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a user. It can be a simple email and password verification, and can also be an OAuth workflow that interacts with a third-party identity provider.

ZenStack is not an authentication solution, but it usually depends on one to work properly. In a real-world application, access control rules usually need to leverage the information of the requesting user. The user information is provided by an authentication solution.

ZenStack is agnostic to the authentication solution you use. The authentication system only needs to be able to provide an object that represents the current user. ZenStack uses it to create a user-scoped enhanced Prisma Client that enforces access policies.

We'll cover this topic in more detail in the next chapter.

#### Popular Authentication Solutions

Here are some popular authentication solutions in the Javascript/Typescript ecosystem:

- [Auth.js (formerly NextAuth)](https://authjs.dev/)
- [Clerk](https://clerk.com)
- [Supabase Auth](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/auth)
- [Auth0](https://auth0.com)
- [Firebase Authentication](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth)
- [Lucia](https://lucia-auth.com/)

You can find how to integrate some of these solutions in the [Integration With Authentication](/docs/category/integrating-with-authentication) guides.

### Authorization

Authorization is the process of determining whether a user has the permission to perform a certain action. ZenStack's core part is an authorization solution that directly couples with the database. It controls what CRUD actions a user can perform on a table or a field.

There are three commonly used patterns for modeling authorization in applications:

1. Access Control List (ACL)

    Users are directly assigned with permissions. For example, a user can be assigned with `read` permission on the `Post` table.

2. Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

    Users are assigned with roles, and roles are assigned with permissions. For example, a user can be assigned with `admin` role, and the `admin` role can be assigned with full permission on the `Post` table.

3. Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)

    Permissions are defined over attributes of the user and the resource. For example, a user can be assigned with 'read' permission to a `Post` row if the `Post` is published and the user is a subscribed member.

A complex application often needs to use a combination of these patterns. ZenStack's access policy system is designed to be both flexible and easy to use.
