---
sidebar_label: 5.6 Post-Update Checks
slug: post-update
---

# Post-Update Checks

Among the "create", "read", "update", and "delete" operations, "update" is a special one, because its data has two states: pre-update and post-update. When you write a policy rule for "update", by default you're checking against the pre-update state. But sometimes you may want to inspect the post-update state. For example, you may want to prevent a user setting a "revision" to a smaller value than the current one.

To define a post-update rule, you use the `future()` function to access the post-update state. Here's an example:

```zmodel
model Post {
    ...
    revision Int

    @@allow('update', future().revision > revision)
}
```

Although there're two kinds of update rules, ZenStack uses a single "update" operation to represent both pre-update and post-update checks. The only difference is that you use the `future()` function to access the post-update state. You may wonder what happens when pre-update and post-update rules are mixed together. For example:

```zmodel
model Post {
    ...
    published Boolean
    revision Int

    @@allow('update', !published && future().revision > revision)
}
```

In fact, ZenStack validates the same "update" rule twice, before and after the update. During pre-update check, all expression components that involve `future()` are ignored (because they don't exist yet). So, for the example above, the pre-update check is equivalent to:

```zmodel
@@allow('update', !published)
```

During post-update check, all expression components that don't involve `future()` are ignored (because they're already checked). So, for the example above, the post-update check is equivalent to:

```zmodel
@@allow('update', future().revision > revision)
```

:::info

When handling update with post-update rules, ZenStack needs to first read the pre-update state of the entity from the database, so it'll incur an extra database query.

:::

One of the use cases of post-update rules is to prevent modification of certain fields. For example, in our Todo app, we allow `List`'s owner to update its field, but we shouldn't allow its owner to be changed. We can use a post-update rule to enforce this:

```zmodel
model List {
    ...

    @@deny('update', future().owner != owner)
}
```

It works, but it feels a bit awkward for such a common use case. In the next chapter, we'll learn about a better way to handle this.
