---
sidebar_label: 4.7 Field-Level Policies
slug: field-level
---

# Field-Level Policies

In the previous parts, we've introduced how to write model-level policies to control CRUD permissions. In database terms, this is called row-level security. With the power of relation traversal, current user access, and flexible expressions and functions, you are fully equipped to handle most real-world authorization scenarios. Sometimes, however, you'll find yourself needing more fine-grained access control.

ZenStack's field-level policies allow you to define access rules for individual fields. For example, you can allow a blog post's owner to update its title and content, but only users with the "EDITOR" role can change the "published" field.

The combination of model-level and field-level policies gives you the ultimate granularity and flexibility and lets ZenStack surpass Postgres's native [row-level-security](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-rowsecurity.html) capabilities.

### Defining Field-Level Policies

To define field-level policies, you use the `@allow` and `@deny` field-level attributes to attach rules to fields. Beware that field-level attributes always start with a single `@`. Here's an example:

```zmodel
model Post {
    ...
    published Boolean @allow('update', auth().role == EDITOR)
}
```

:::info

You can't use `future()` function in field-level access policies. To express post-update rules, put them into model-level policies. We have an active [feature request](https://github.com/zenstackhq/zenstack/issues/671) for it.

:::

### Difference Between Field-Level and Model-Level Policies

A few key differences between field-level policies and model-level policies:

- Field-level policies only support "read", "update", and "all" operations. It's not meaningful to control "create" and "delete" permissions at the field level.
- Field-level access is allowed by default. If you don't attach any rule to a field, it's accessible as long as the model is accessible. On the contrary, model-level access is denied by default. You'll have to explicitly open up access using `@@allow` attributes.

### Behavior of Field-Level Access Control

A field's accessibility is determined in the following order:

- If no access policies are defined for the field, the operation is allowed
- If any `@deny` rule is satisfied, the operation is denied
- If some `@allow` rules are defined, and none of them are satisfied, the operation is denied
- Otherwise, the operation is allowed

When a "read" operation is denied, the field is dropped from the result. When an "update" operation is denied, the operation is rejected with an error.

### Overriding Model-Level Policies

To successfully "read" or "update" a field, the current user must first satisfy the corresponding model-level policies unless the field-level `@allow` attribute is passed with a third argument `true` to override.

```zmodel

model Post {
    ...
    published Boolean @allow('update', auth().role == EDITOR, true)

    @@allow('update', !published)
}
```

In the example above, if a `Post` is published, although the model-level policy denies updates, an EDITOR user can still update the `published` field (and only this field) because of the overriding setting on the field-level policy. Without the override flag, the update operation will be denied.

You can use this feature with "read" policies, too. If a field has an override "read" policy, the field can be read if it's explicitly selected in the query, even if the model-level policy denies access.

### 🛠️ Adding Field-Level Policies

Back to where we left off in the previous chapter, let's tighten up our schema and prevent the `ownerId` field from being updated for `List` and `Todo`:

```zmodel title="schema.zmodel"
model List {
    ...
    ownerId Int @default(auth().id) @deny('update', true)
}

model Todo {
    ...
    ownerId Int @default(auth().id) @deny('update', true)
}
```

Rerun generation and start REPL:

```bash
npx zenstack generate
npx zenstack repl
```

First, create a new `List` using Joey (id #1):

```js
.auth { id: 1 }
db.list.create({ data: { title: "Joey' List", private: true, owner: { connect: { id: 1 } }, space: { connect: { id: 1 } } } })
```

Result:

```js
{
  id: 4,
  createdAt: 2023-11-09T05:36:20.264Z,
  updatedAt: 2023-11-09T05:36:20.264Z,
  spaceId: 1,
  ownerId: 1,
  title: "Joey' List",
  private: true
}
```

Try to update the `owner` field to Rachel (id #2):

```js
db.list.update({ where: { id: 1 }, data: { owner: { connect: 2 } } })
```

The operation is denied:

```js
denied by policy: list entities failed 'update' check, entity { id: 1 } failed update policy check for field "owner"
Code: P2004
Meta: { reason: 'ACCESS_POLICY_VIOLATION' }
```
