---
sidebar_label: 4.6 Post-Update Checks
slug: post-update
---

# Post-Update Checks

Among the "create", "read", "update", and "delete" operations, "update" is a special one, because its data has two states: pre-update and post-update. When you write a policy rule for "update", by default, you're checking against the pre-update state. But sometimes, you may want to inspect the post-update state. For example, you may wish to prevent a user from setting a "revision" to a smaller value than the current one.

To define a post-update rule, you use the `future()` function to access the post-update state. Here's an example:

```zmodel
model Post {
    ...
    revision Int

    @@allow('update', future().revision > revision)
}
```

Although there are two kinds of update rules, ZenStack uses a single "update" operation to represent both pre-update and post-update checks. The only difference is that you use the `future()` function to access the post-update state. What happens when pre-update and post-update rules are mixed? For example:

```zmodel
model Post {
    ...
    published Boolean
    revision Int

    @@allow('update', !published && future().revision > revision)
}
```

When ZenStack detects that a model has "update" rules involving `future()` calls, it'll postpone the evaluation of all "update" rules of that model to the "post-update" stage. It analyzes what fields' pre-update state is needed and collects them before the update happens.

One of the use cases of post-update rules is to prevent modification of specific fields. For example, in our Todo app, we allow `List`'s owner to update its fields, but we shouldn't allow its owner to be changed. We can use a post-update rule to enforce this:

```zmodel
model List {
    ...

    @@deny('update', future().owner != owner)
}
```

It works, but it feels a bit awkward for such a common use case. In the next chapter, we'll learn a better way to handle this.
