---
sidebar_label: 4.8 Delegating Access Control To Relations
slug: delegate-to-relation
---

# Delegating Access Control To Relations

ZenStack's access policies provide you with a powerful tool to model authorization in a intuitive and declarative way. However, as your application grows, you may find yourself repeating the same access policy patterns across multiple models. In this section, we'll review a typical type of duplication and show you how to avoid it by delegating to related models.

### Parent-Child Duplication

If your application has a hierarchy of models, you'll quite often notice that the child models repeat the access policies of their parent. This can be found in our Todo schema, where `List` and `Todo` models have a parent-child relationship:

```zmodel
model List {
  ...

  // require login
  @@deny('all', auth() == null)

  // can be read by space members if not private
  @@allow('read', owner == auth() || (space.members?[user == auth()] && !private))

  // when create, owner must be set to current user, and user must be in the space
  @@allow('create,update', owner == auth() && space.members?[user == auth()])

  ...
}

model Todo {
  ...

  // require login
  @@deny('all', auth() == null)

  // owner has full access
  @@allow('all', list.owner == auth())

  // space members have full access if the parent List is not private
  @@allow('all', list.space.members?[user == auth()] && !list.private)
}
```

Although not a 100% match, the rules of `Todo` closely resemble those of `List`. How can we avoid such duplication and stay DRY?

### Delegating Access Control to a Relation

If we carefully inspect the policies, we'll find the rules of `Todo` can summarized into a single statement:

> One has full access to a `Todo` entity if he can read its parent `List` entity.

ZenStack provides a `check()` attribute function for you to delegate access control of the current model to a relation. Let's refactor the `Todo` model to use this feature 🛠️:

```zmodel
model Todo {
    ...

    // full access if the parent list is readable
    @@allow('all', check(list, 'read'))
}
```

When authorizing an operation on a `Todo` (e.g., "update"), ZenStack will make the decision based on if the related `List` entity is readable. If you adjust the rules on `List` in the future, the `Todo` model automatically follows without needing any changes.

The `check()` API can be used in both model-level and field-level policies. See the [API Reference](../../../reference/zmodel-language#check) for more details.